doc: add package.json documentation (#32970)
nodejs/node: doc/api/package.json.md

> # Package.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# <code>package.json</code>
```

Author: Resolved via 5a3959c7ee1c97537afab22c4e56b2926a59bbb2

<!--introduced_in=REPLACEME-->
<!-- type=misc -->

## Introduction

A folder containing a `package.json` file, and all subfolders below that folder
down until the next folder containing another `package.json`, is considered a

> _package scope_. This document aims to describe the fields used by Node.js
> runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_package scope_. This document aims to describe the fields used by the
Node.js runtime.
```

Reviewer: The two sentences in this paragraph don't really belong together. The first defines a package scope, the second introduces this document.

The overall order of sections is a bit off, IMO. I would think that `"name"` should come first, and there should be an explanation of how this field is used with `require` and `import`. When one does `require('foo')`, does Node look for a folder named `node_modules/foo` or a package with `"name": "foo"`? What happens when they disagree? Etc. If Node doesn't use the field at all, we shouldn't be documenting the field.

After that I think should be introduction of package scope and `"type"`. Then exports, conditional exports and finally `"main"`.

Reviewer: Perhaps in the introduction you can list all the fields that Node recognizes, in alphabetical order, with each field linked to its section? That way we can keep a section name like Conditional Exports, but in the introduction you can have something like “`"exports"`: See [Exports](#) and [Conditional Exports](#)”. And then the sections can be in logical order of what makes the most sense for someone reading this document from top to bottom, but there’s still this table of contents to jump to a particular field.

As for the resolution algorithm, I think it differs in CommonJS versus ESM, so it's probably best kept in each of those sections and linked to from here.

Author: > Perhaps in the introduction you can list all the fields that Node recognizes, in alphabetical order, with each field linked to its section?

Wouldn't that be redundant with the TOC?

Reviewer: Possibly, though there’s a disparity in the section names like Conditional Exports and the fields like `"exports"`. We probably want to provide a way for people to look them up via either.

Author: @GeoffreyBooth I've made some changes, now the TOC look like this:

```markdown
* `package.json`
    * Introduction
    * Supported fields
        * `"name"`
        * `"exports"`
            * Subpath Exports
            * Package Exports Fallbacks
            * Exports Sugar
            * Conditional Exports
            * Nested conditions
        * `"main"`
        * `"type"`
```

Does that work for you?

Reviewer: Sure, that looks great!

Author: Maybe I'm missing something, but I don't see how `"type"` and `"exports"` are related... `"type"` is atm related to the `"main"` field, but #33086 should change that.

The way I see it, its sole purpose is to set the correct parser for `.js` files, which is different from other fields that affect the resolution algorithm, which is why I put it last.

> 

Reviewer 2: It would likely be good to say something in here about how the `package.json` file is used by multiple tools and that additional fields may be used that Node.js does not necessarily support.

Reviewer 3: I think it should also link npm documentation about this file.

Reviewer 4: Agree with both comments above, and point to the [yarn docs](https://classic.yarnpkg.com/en/docs/package-json/ ), too.

Reviewer 5: I don't think node docs should be linking to a package manager it doesn't ship; there's far more than npm or yarn out there (there's more than one set of relevant yarn docs, even - v1 vs v2), and it's a slippery slope to include this.

Reviewer 4: @ljharb Even if we don't deep link to npm and yarn docs, we have to mention that the file is used by other tools, or we will be flooded by bug reports about the package.json fields that we "failed to document". Actual links have the downside of possibly becoming broken, but they are what is most useful to readers of the docs, and I think our docs should stive to be most useful.

Reviewer 5: Absolutely it should mention that fields can be used by other tools; I just don't think node docs should be enumerating those.

Reviewer 4: Ah, so you think we should link to only npm, because we only ship npm?

Reviewer: I think we should link to npm's documentation and mention that other tools use `package.json`, and that's it. Npm is special both because Node ships it and that tool either created the `package.json` file/spec or defined most of the fields in it.

Reviewer 5: @sam-github yes.

Author: Resolved via 98454d647ff23deaf1d0226c0de7406fc3f2fa91

referenced via `require` or via `import`.

#### Subpath Exports

When using the `"exports"` field, custom subpaths can be defined along
with the main entry point by treating the main entry point as the
`"."` subpath:

```json
{
  "main": "./main.js",
  "exports": {
    ".": "./main.js",
    "./submodule": "./src/submodule.js"
  }
}
```

Now only the defined subpath in `"exports"` can be imported by a
consumer:

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
import submodule from 'es-module-package/submodule';
// Loads ./node_modules/es-module-package/src/submodule.js
```

While other subpaths will error:

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
import submodule from 'es-module-package/private-module.js';
// Throws ERR_PACKAGE_PATH_NOT_EXPORTED
```

Entire folders can also be mapped with package exports:

```json
// ./node_modules/es-module-package/package.json
{
  "exports": {
    "./features/": "./src/features/"
  }
}
```

With the above, all modules within the `./src/features/` folder
are exposed deeply to `import` and `require`:

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
import feature from 'es-module-package/features/x.js';
// Loads ./node_modules/es-module-package/src/features/x.js
```

> When using folder mappings, ensure that you do want to expose every
> module inside the subfolder. Any modules which are not public
> should be moved to another folder to retain the encapsulation
> benefits of exports.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using folder mappings, every module contained within the
folder will be exposed. Any modules which are not public
should be moved to another folder to retain the encapsulation
benefits of exports.
```

# `package.json`

<!--introduced_in=REPLACEME-->
<!-- type=misc -->

## Introduction

> A `package.json` file defines a package scope: its parent directory, and all

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A `package.json` file defines a package scope. Its parent directory, and all
```

subfolders below that folder down until the next folder containing another
`package.json`, is considered a _package scope_.

This document aims to describe the fields used by the Node.js

> runtime. Other tools (E.G.:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
runtime. Other tools (such as
```

[npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/creating-a-package-json-file)) may use additional
fields which are ignored by Node.js and not documented in this document.

## Supported fields

### `"name"`

```json
{
    "name": "package-name"
}
```

The `"name"` field defines your package’s name. Node.js doesn't apply any
restriction on the name field, although the field is ignored if it is not a
string or an empty string.

The `"name"` field can be used in addition to the [`"exports"`][] field to
[self-reference a package using its name][].

### `"exports"`

```json
{
    "exports": "./index.js"
}
```

The `"exports"` field provides an alternative to [`"main"`][] where the package
main entry point can be defined while also encapsulating the package, preventing
any other entry points besides those defined in `"exports"`. If package entry
points are defined in both [`"main"`][] and `"exports"`, the latter takes
precedence in versions of Node.js that support `"exports"`.
[Conditional Exports][] can also be used within `"exports"` to define different
package entry points per environment, including whether the package is

> referenced via `require` or via `import`.

Author: Good catch! I have added a line to explicitly state that `"exports"` expects file URL starting with `./` and `"main"` expects a path. I also added that `"exports"` takes precedence over `"main"` only when referencing a package by its name. PTAL.

given third-party tool support for a `"browser"` condition.

#### Nested conditions

In addition to direct mappings, Node.js also supports nested condition objects.

For example, to define a package that only has dual mode entry points for
use in Node.js but not the browser:

```json
{
  "main": "./main.js",
  "exports": {
    "browser": "./feature-browser.mjs",
    "node": {
      "import": "./feature-node.mjs",
      "require": "./feature-node.cjs"
    }
  }
}
```

Conditions continue to be matched in order as with flat conditions. If
a nested conditional does not have any mapping it will continue checking
the remaining conditions of the parent condition. In this way nested
conditions behave analogously to nested JavaScript `if` statements.

### `"main"`

```json
{
    "main": "./main.js"
}
```

The `"main"` field defines the script that is used when the
current directory is required by another script.

```js
require('./path/to/directory'); // This resolves to ./path/to/directory/main.js.
```

This field is ignored when the [`"exports"`][] field is provided. The `"main"`
field is supported in all versions of Node.js, but its capabilities are limited:

> it only defines the main entry point of the package.

Author: TIL you can feed an absolute path to `"main"` and Node.js doesn't complain and load the script even if it's in a completely unrelated directory 🤯

Also worth noting that `"main"` takes a path and `"exports"` file URLs. I wasn't sure how to phrase it, so I just added `Its value is interpreted as a path.`. I'm open to better suggestions x)

# `package.json`

<!--introduced_in=REPLACEME-->
<!-- type=misc -->

## Introduction

A `package.json` file defines a package scope. Its parent directory, and all
subfolders below that folder down until the next folder containing another
`package.json`, is considered a _package scope_.

This document aims to describe the fields used by the Node.js
runtime. Other tools (such as
[npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/creating-a-package-json-file)) may use additional
fields which are ignored by Node.js and not documented in this document.

## Supported fields

### `"name"`
<!-- YAML
added:
  - v13.1.0

>   - v12.16.0

Author: This was added based on a user request (#33143). The introduction explicitly state that the documented fields are the one used by Node.js only. Do you suggest to just remove it or to make it clearer that it can be used alongside older versions of Node.js?

changes:
  - version: v13.6.0
    pr-url: https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/31002
    description: Remove the --experimental-resolve-self option.
-->

```json
{
    "name": "package-name"
}
```

The `"name"` field defines your package’s name. Node.js doesn't apply any
restriction on the name field, although the field is ignored if it is not a
string or an empty string.

The `"name"` field can be used in addition to the [`"exports"`][] field to
[self-reference a package using its name][].

### `"exports"`
<!-- YAML
added: v12.7.0
changes:
  - version: v13.2.0
    pr-url: https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/29978
    description: Implements conditional exports.
  - version: v13.7.0
    pr-url: https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/31001
    description: Remove the --experimental-conditional-exports option.
  - version: v13.7.0
    pr-url: https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/31008
    description: Implement logical conditional exports ordering.
-->

```json
{

>     "exports": "./index.js"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "exports": "./index.js"
```

node my-app.js # Runs as ES module
```

If the nearest parent `package.json` lacks a `"type"` field, or contains
`"type": "commonjs"`, `.js` files are treated as CommonJS. If the volume root is
reached and no `package.json` is found, Node.js defers to the default, a
`package.json` with no `"type"` field.

`import` statements of `.js` files are treated as ES modules if the nearest
parent `package.json` contains `"type": "module"`.

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
// my-app.js, part of the same example as above
import './startup.js'; // Loaded as ES module because of package.json
```

Package authors should include the `"type"` field, even in packages where all
sources are CommonJS. Being explicit about the `type` of the package will
future-proof the package in case the default type of Node.js ever changes, and
it will also make things easier for build tools and loaders to determine how the
files in the package should be interpreted.

Regardless of the value of the `"type"` field, `.mjs` files are always treated
as ES modules and `.cjs` files are always treated as CommonJS.

If the `"type"` field is not provided or is using an unsupported value, it is

> treated as `"commonjs"`.

Reviewer 7: Perhaps we can remove this line, and then just include the `"or is using an unsupported value"` in one of the descriptions of this above, since there is quite a bit of repetition here.
